.\" Copyright (C) 2023 Kevin Boone 
.\" Permission is granted to any individual or institution to use, copy, or
.\" redistribute this software so long as all of the original files are
.\" included, that it is not sold for profit, and that this copyright notice
.\" is retained.
.\"
.TH vlc-server 1 "March 2023"
.SH NAME
vlc-server -- an HTTP front-end for the VLC media player 

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vlc-server\ [options] -- [VLC options]
.PP

.SH DESCRIPTION

\fIvlc-server\fR is an HTTP-enabled front end to the VLC player. Although it
does support video playback (if the host hardware does), it is mostly intended
for audio use and, in particular, multi-room audio applications. 

\fIvlc-server\fR provides a web user interface, and also a REST-like API that
other clients can use. 

At present, \fIvlc-server\fR plays URLs, or local files which are expected to
be grouped into directories under a common "media root" directory. The server
does not expose any other part of the underlying filesystem to clients.

There is an accompanying \fIvlc-server-client\fR which provides a command-line
interface to the media player. This client can select files to play, change the
playback position, etc.

.SH "OPTIONS"

As well as the following options, \fIvlc-server\fR supports all the same
options as the VLC command-line player. These can be specified on the command
line after a "--" token.

.TP
.BI -a,\-\-patterns={patterns]
.LP

Specify a list of filename patterns that the server will accept as playable
files. This is important in situation where a user of the web interface might
use the "add all" function, to add all the files in a directory to the
playlist. Many potential files will not be playable, and that is not really a
problem -- the server will just log an error and carry on. However, some files
-- particularly image files (cover art, for example), can be "played", and will
cause the server to get stuck showing the image.

The file patterns should be separated by commas, with no spaces. For example

.BI \-\-patterns=*.flac,*.mp3,*.aac

This pattern affects not just the files that the player will accept, but also
the use of the REST API to browse files and directories under the media root.
When listing a directory's content, only those that match the specified
patterns will be returned.

If this option is not given, all common audio file types are candidates for
playback.

.TP
.BI -d,\-\-database
.LP
Specify the media database file. If not given, the default is the file
\fIvlc-server.sqlite\fR in the media root directory. This file will be
created, if it does not exist, and if the server has write access to
the directory. 

If the server creates a new database, it will not scan media in the filesystem
until it is asked to, either by the web user interface or some command-line
operation.

Please note that the media database must be writeable, in a writable directory.
The main content directory (the media root) need not be writeable at all; this
is why there is an option to specify the database location separately.

.TP
.BI -e,\-\-entries={number}
.LP
The maximum number of items that will be shown on each page in the Web
interface. Where there are more items than this, the interface will display
navigation controls.

This limit applies to albums, tracks, etc., as well as files and folders. The
default is 30, which might be a little small. The reason for this limit is
self-protection -- all the content on a given page is retrieved in a single
request, with the response being built up in memory.

.TP
.BI -f,\-\-foreground
.LP
Do not detach the server from the console. Log messages are sent to standard
out. This is not the default: normal operation is to run in the background, and
send log messages to the system log.

Note that this option also applies when \fIvlc-server\fR is being run only to
scan and update the media database -- this also would be a background operation
with \fI-f\fR.

.TP
.BI -l,\-\-log\-level={0..4}
.LP
Sets the system log level.  High (verbose) log levels will probably be
meaningful only if examined alongside the program's source code.  The default
value is 2, which includes errors, warnings, and a few informational messages.

.TP
.BI -l,\-\-list-devices
.LP
Lists the available audio output devices. The devices available depend on the
platform, and the way in which VLC is installed. Use VLC command-line options
to select a playback device (see below).

.TP
.BI -n,\-\-name={string}
.LP
The name of the server, which is displayed in various places on the web
interface. This setting is intended to distinguish different server instances
in the same installation. The default is the system hostname. 

.TP
.BI -p,\-\-port={number}
.LP
The main HTTP port number for \fIvlc-server\fR, that will be used by web
browsers and REST API clients. The default is 30000.

.TP
.BI -q,\-\-quickscan
.LP
Start a 'quick' scan of the media root, to update the media database.  In a
quick scan, files are not inspected if they already have entries in the
database. In nearly all cases this is the kind of scan to use.

If the media database does not exist, a 'quick' scan will actually turn into a
full scan, and take just as long.

.TP
.BI -r,\-\-media-root={directory}
.LP
The top-level directory for local audio files. If audio files are in many
disparate directories, it is fine to create a new directory and populate it
with symbolic links to the real file locations. 

.TP
.BI -s,\-\-scan
.LP
Start a full scan of the media root, to update the media database.  In a full
scan, files are inspected whether they have entries in the database or not. The
only time such a scan is likely to be necessary is if files have been re-tagged
while keeping the same names. 

.SH NOTES

.SS User privileges

\fIvlc-server\fR is designed to run as an unprivileged user. It needs no
special permissions -- a user account that can run VLC will be able to run this
server. 

Neither the media to be played, nor any directory in which it is contained,
need to be writeable (with one small exception -- see below).  However, the
media database needs to be writeable.  This is why the `-d` switch is
available, to set the media database outside the main content directory. If
this switch is not given, then at least the top-level directory of the media
content needs to be writeable.

The media scanner, when it updates the database, will try to extract cover art
files from audio files, and will write them into the same directory as the
audio files. These files will be called "cover.XXX", where the XXX depends on
the image type (PNG, JPG...). If the directories are not writeable, then these
cover art files will not be extracted. However, this won't stop the scanner
working.

.SS Browser compatibility

\fIvlc-server\fR requires a fairly modern web browser. It uses media queries to
size the display to fit screens of different sizes, and 'flex' layout to create
tables with dynamic numbers of columns. Most of the testing has been done using
Firefox. However, any browser released since about 2018 should be fine -- the
server's demands are not stringent.

The \fI--entries\fR setting exists to protect the browser from receiving a huge
amount of data in one request. To some extent it also protects the server from
abusive clients. The webserver defaults to showing 30 folders, tracks, albums,
etc. (with cover art) in each page. With a modern browser and powerful server,
there's no problem increasing this to 500 or more.  However, if the server is a
Raspberry Pi, more caution should be exercised.

.SS Cover art display 

The web interface will attempt to display cover art images alongside local
folders, if it can find a suitable image file in the folder.  Images will be
scaled to 256x256 pixels. The server recognizes most of the common names for
cover art:  (`folder.png`, `cover.jpg`, etc).

.SS VLC command-line switches

\fIvlc-server\fR passes all command-line arguments after "--" to the libvlc
library. This library takes the same arguments as the command-line VLC player
application, so you can run "vlc --help" to get a full list. No assurance is
offered that all VLC options will work with \fIvlc-server\fR. One useful VLC
option, in audio playback applications, is \fI--no-video\fR. Various options
are available to set the audio output device (e.g., \fI--alsa-audio-device\fR)
-- see the VLC manual for more details. 

.SS Audio output

\fIvlc-server\fR uses the default audio output of VLC. On systems that have
PulseAudio, that will almost certainly be used in preference to anything else,
although this depends on how the libvlc library was built. To change the audio
output routing, it is necessary to use VLC command-line switches.

.SS Volume control

The web interface exposes a volume control, as does the REST API. This volume
control affects only VLC's output level -- whether it applies a \fIsystem\fR
volume change depends on how VLC is set up.

.\" end of file
