.\" Copyright (C) 2023 Kevin Boone 
.\" Permission is granted to any individual or institution to use, copy, or
.\" redistribute this software so long as all of the original files are
.\" included, that it is not sold for profit, and that this copyright notice
.\" is retained.
.\"
.TH vlc-server 1 "November 2023"
.SH NAME
vlc-server-client -- a command-line client for the vlc-server  media player 

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vlc-server-client\ [options] {command} {arguments}
.PP

.SH DESCRIPTION

\fIvlc-server-client\fR is a command-line client for the  
\fIvlc-server\fR media player, which is itself an HTTP interface to the VLC
player. The client allows all features of the server to be exercised, and
uses the same HTTP REST interface that any other client would use
(including the web interface). Its main function is to test the server,
but it can be used as a rather crude, command-line media player. 

.SH "OPTIONS"

.TP
.BI -h,\-\-host={hostname]
.LP
Specify the hostname or IP number of the \fIvlc-server\fR host.
Default: localhost.

.TP
.BI -p,\-\-port={number]
.LP
Specify the IP port number of the \fIvlc-server\fR instance.
Default: 30000.

.SH COMMANDS

.TP
.BI add-urls\ {item1}\ [item2]... 
.LP
Add one or more URL items to the server's playlist. These items can be
full URLs, or local files. Since the client probably does not know the
locations of local files on the server, the server accepts the token
"@" in a filename as referring to its media root directory. Suitable 
filenames can be seen by running the \fIlist-files\fR and  \fIlist-dirs\fR 
commands, whose output is always relative to the media root. If
there is a media database, the \fIlist-tracks\fR can also be useds. In
the latter case, the results are also relative to the media database,
and must be preceded by "@".

The items to be added can be local directories, in which case the 
server will add all files in the specified directory, whose names match
the allowed filename patterns.

.TP
.BI clear 
.LP
Clear the server's playlist. Anything that is currently playing will
be allowed to finish.

.TP
.BI index 
.LP
Select a specific item in the playlist to play. The first playlist
item is 0.

.TP
.BI list-albums\ [where] 
.LP
List albums whose names match the 'where' expression. If no expression
is specified, then list all albums. See the section on 'where expressions'
for more information about the expression syntax.

.TP
.BI list-artists\ [where] 
.LP
List artists whose names match the 'where' expression. If no expression
is specified, then list all artists. 

.TP
.BI list-composers\ [where] 
.LP
List composers whose names match the 'where' expression. If no expression
is specified, then list all composers. 

.TP
.BI list-dirs\ [path] 
.LP
List the directories under \fIpath\fR, or the server's media root if
no path is given. The directories will be full paths, relative to the
media root. The specified path may begin with '/', but need not.
The "@" token, indicating the media root, cannot be used here, because
these paths are always relative to the media root.

If the server is running with specified allowed filename patterns, then
the list operation only returns files whose names match those patterns;
it would be pointless to return files that cannot be played.

.TP
.BI list-files\ [path] 
.LP
List the files under \fIpath\fR, or the server's media root if
no path is given. 

.TP
.BI list-genres\ [where] 
.LP
List genres whose names match the 'where' expression. If no expression
is specified, then list all genres. 

.TP
.BI list-tracks\ [where] 
.LP
List tracks whose names match the 'where' expression. If no expression
is specified, then list all tracks. 

.TP
.BI next 
.LP
Move to the next item in the playlist.

.TP
.BI pause 
.LP
Pause playback. Use \fIstart\fR to resume.

.TP
.BI play\ {item1}\ [item2]... 
.LP

As \fIadd\fR, except that the server's playlist if first cleared,
and then playback starts with the first of the new items.
See \fIadd\fR for more details. See the description of \fIadd-url\fR
for description of the URL format.

.TP
.BI play-random-album 
.LP

Play a randomly-selected album, replacing any existing playlist. Playback
starts immediately.

.TP
.BI play-random-tracks
.LP

Play 50 randomly-selected tracks, replacing any existing playlist. Playback
starts immediately.

.TP
.BI playlist
.LP

Display the server's playlist. Items that represent local files,
and that can be reached relative to the server's media root, will
have a "@" in place of the media root. In other cases, the list
will be of full URLs.

.TP
.BI prev
.LP
Move to the previous item in the playlist. This does not skip back
to the beginning if playback is well advanced in the current item --
it always goes to the previous item, if there is one. 

.TP
.BI scan
.LP
Start a rescan of the media root directory, and update the
database.

.TP
.BI shutdown 
.LP
Shut the server down, immediately, with no warnings.

.TP
.BI start 
.LP
Resumes playback, if it is paused. Otherwise, start playing at the
beginning of the playlist, if there is one.

.TP
.BI stat 
.LP
Show the server status, including the transport status (playing, buffering...)
and the current playlist item.

.TP
.BI stop
.LP
Stop playback immediately, and reset the current playlist index to 
0 (not the beginning of the current item).

.TP
.BI storage
.LP
Reports storage used on the server.

.TP
.BI volume {0..100}
.LP

Set or get the server's playback volume. Note that this is the VLC
volume, and does not refer to any platform-level mixer or volume control
that may be in effect. The range is nominally 0..100, but VLC may
accept higher volume levels. Of course, it's only meaningful to use
a level greater than 100 if the source audio is recorded badly, and
too quiet. With properly recorded material the volume cannot be
increased above 100%, and the output will just clip, and sound horrible.

.SH WHERE EXPRESSIONS

Some commands take an expression that limits the search in the media
database. There expression take the form of SQL, and care has to be taken
to ensure that the correct escape characters are used. For example

$ vlc-server-client list-albums "composer like 'bach%'" 

Here, the search text 'bach%' must be enclosed in single quotes, because
that is what SQL syntax demands. However, the whole argument
must be enclosed in double quotes, else "composer", "like", and
"bach%" would be treated as separate arguments. On the Linux
command line, single-quotes inside double-quotes keep their meanings
as quotation marks.

Because the where expression is SQL, it is necessary to escape 
characters that have a specific meaning to SQL. So, for example,
a single-quote character must be entered as two single-quote
characters. 

The following string ield names can be user in expressions: path,
title, album, genre, composer, artist, track, comment, year.
There are also numeric 'size' and 'mtime' (modification time)
fields. The modification time is stored as a Unix epoch time. 

.SH NOTES 

\fIlist-dirs\fR and \fIlist-files\fR both list the contents of a specific
directory. There are separate commands to list the files and the directories,
because there are are separate API calls on the server. 


.\" end of file
