# What is this?

`vlc-server` is a Linux application that wraps the VLC media player, with the
goal of providing an HTTP-based interface for Music playback, and searching
music metadata (tags).  The Web interface can be used by a desktop web browser,
or by a cellphone or tablet. There is also a REST-like HTTP interface that can
be used by other software.

`vlc-server` is really designed for playback of _local_ music files, stored in
any of the usual formats: FLAC, MP3... I have about a thousand CD albums,
mostly stored as FLAC. I also use Spotify, Qobuz, and others; but mostly what I
listen to is good-quality CD rips. Some other albums I purchased for download
from Qobuz, etc., but most are just rips of physical CDs.

I wrote `vlc-server` to run on a custom media player I built using a Raspberry
Pi, a 5" screen, a 1Tb SSD, and a DAC. This modestly-sized box sits on a shelf
next to my hifi system. I select what to play either using the web interface,
or an ncurses console client that I wrote as a text-based front-end for the
player. The console client uses minimal resources and starts in a fraction of a
second, even on a Pi 3. It responds to the specific keystrokes generated by a
Microsoft Media Center remove control.  This remote control, coupled with the
built-in screen, provides an alternative to a web browser for selecting what to
play.

The client-server nature of the `vlc-server` system means that I could install
multiple instances of the media player in different rooms, and control them
independently using a cellphone. This is the same kind of thing that
proprietary multi-room audio systems do, but at a fraction of the price.

I also run `vlc-server` on my (Linux) home and office PCs. There are better
media players for this kind of desktop use, but `vlc-server` is adequate for my
purposes. The web interface is pretty quick to use, as there is no baggage --
just a display of album covers or metadata. `vlc-server` does not pretend to be
comprehensive -- it will never stream Spotify, or edit music tags, or integrate
with social media. It's really just the software part of a custom music player,
that allows me to put a massive CD collection into a small box.


